And we went back to the hospital and we did the
surgery. They stayed here in town in a motel until
the surgery was over. Then they flew out. And then
later when the dog recovered, they flew back in.
And they own Harry and David's Orchards in the
state of Washington. I guess the largest fruit
shipping company in the whole US. Now most of these
were canine? Most were canine. I did some feline.
And I did a few exotics. Such as? I did a Bengal tiger
once, which was a real challenge. But I didn't go in
the surgery room until he was under anesthesia.
From where did he come? It was from a zoo. Okay. And
why here? Because we had developed that specialty
and they knew to call here and that we had the
capabilities to handle that kind of animal. Now,
surely there must have been some goofy situations
or something. Oh, there were a lot of fun times that
we had. One time, I'll never forget this. We had,
back in the surgery recovery area, we had these
small cages where they would recover from
anesthesia. And we had done surgery on a little
chihuahua that probably weighed three or four
pounds. And he was in his cage and already
recovered and was on his feet. And one of the
students went over to the large animal clinic and
got a whole little bowl of horse apple feces and
came in and put it in the cage with that little bitty
chihuahua, giving the impression that he had
deposited that enormous amount. And of course
that brought the house down. And I will never
forget one other thing that happened when I was a
faculty member. There was a professor here that
taught business law named Judge Stewart. And he
was a character, and I had had him for
jurisprudence when I was a veterinary student.
And he was salty, but probably the most
entertaining professor I ever had. But
everybody's kind of afraid of him, and he couldn't
drive because I think he'd had his license
revoked, because he liked the bottle a little. But
his wife brought their cat, to the small animal
clinic and that cat got out of the cage when the
student was taking it out and got behind the cages
and they could not get the cat out and she was at the
front desk to take that cat home. So everybody was
running around there so fearful of what he would do
and you know they could just see him coming out
there and blowing up and lawsuit and what all might
happen. And it took two or three days to get that cat
out from behind that
cage. Any glamorous Texans pets that you had to
deal with? Governors, politicians, board
members, coaches, millionaires?
We did have
And I don't, this was after I came back though,
after going to the University of Tennessee. We had
Bumbright's dog. I don't recall any major ones at
that time. And in doing this surgery, you had
students as a learning experience for them who
were assisting you? In the teaching hospital, Not
only did, of course, the students have the
lectures and the laboratories where they
practiced, but then when they were assigned
hospital duty rotations, they would rotate among
the different disciplines such as
anesthesiology, emergency medicine, and mine
was neurosurgery. And we usually had four
students assigned to us for an entire week. Those
four students would work with us on every one of our
cases from the time we admitted them through all
the diagnostics, to the time of surgery, to the
time of recovery. And of course they would inherit
cases that were in different stages of their
hospital stay. And the students would be
responsible for the medical records. Ultimately
I was as the attending doctor. But the student had
to write it up. They gave the medications,
recorded it. They were responsible for calling
an owner and giving them an update. They scrubbed
in in surgery. They would take turns in doing that.
They would watch anesthesia. And just the whole
care that would happen. And if they had to stay all
night, it was their responsibility to stay all
night with their patient. And they were given a
certain assignment for a specific number of
cases. So they stayed a week with us. And you get to
know people pretty pretty closely in that kind of
week's period of time and they knew what the
grading criteria would be for that week so every
week I had to sit down with a grading card that had a
set number of criteria based upon clinical skills
background knowledge just the whole spectrum
of responsible teaching activities that we had
toward them to see if they would pass it. And
normally on one of those surgeries about how long
did the surgical process take? That varied but I
would say I was a fast surgeon and most of the time My
procedure from incision to closure was no more
than 20, 30 minutes. If it was a complicated case,
such as a fractured back where I had to go in and put
steel plates or something, those could take up to
two hours. Most of the time, not much more than an
hour, hour and a half. If it were a brain surgery,
which we did a number of those, brain tumor, head
trauma, those were more complicated and would go
an hour, hour and a half. So from the time the animal
was injected to... No, that's actual surgical
procedure. From the time of anesthesia to the time
of recovery was probably no less than... That
would probably be an hour and a half to two hours on
all of those. And then would that animal then be
capable of walking immediately? We had to stay
with them. You have to help them. They're not like a
human patient that you can keep on a bed. A lot of
times the students have to hold them because when
they start trying to wake, they fall around. They
have to hold them until they get ambulatory. Once
they were ambulatory, then you could clearly
allowed on their own. And was it normal for them to
become ambulatory within a few hours? Yeah,
actually you start lightening the anesthesia as
you're closing the skin. So most of them were
ambulatory within two hours after the surgery.
And almost all of these were pets? They were all
pets. And
did you detect in those students much difference
between their talents, ambitions, et cetera,
than you and your classmates?
No, I wouldn't say that I saw any of that. I would say
that I saw them have the opportunity to be able to do
things that we had not been able to do simply
because people were now willing to pay for it. So
they got to do a lot more of the new exciting things.
Of course, that was great for us because here we
were implementing a lot of those. And it was a great
time for me career wise because I was getting to
pioneer a lot of the neurosurgery that's
currently done in the dog and to travel the
country. and give presentations and give
continuing education seminars and actually do
live surgical demonstrations. A lot of times we
did closed circuit TV. And this was the cost of this
was paid for by the owner. So it was
self-sustaining. Self-sustaining. See, that
was one other part of the teaching component was to
teach the students the business side of it because
the complaints in almost all medical professions
was the students don't know about that business
side of it, which is a side of it. And most of the time
when you're going to veterinary college, you just
don't want to even face that. But we had to because
the hospital had to sustain itself based on the
revenue of the cases. And we had to teach that as a
part of the responsibility. Now, this was a
12-month year? Oh, yeah. And you're here how long
in that stretch? I stayed in that stretch from 1969
March of 1969 to October of 1974.
And then go to? I went to the University of
Tennessee, and I was 32 years old, and that's where
I entered administration. How did that come
about? Well, that's real interesting. Can you
stop
And I get a phone call, and one of the secretaries
came down and said, it's an important call from the
Colton Party. So I go down to my office, and I
see a doctor
who currently is a dean at Michigan State College
of Internal Medicine. And he said, I don't know
whether you've heard or not, But we're starting a
new college of veterinary medicine at the
University of Tennessee, and I'm going to be the
new dean. And I just wondered if you would have any
interest in being head of the small animal
medicine and the surgery department. Well, that
almost knocked me on the floor because I thought,
my, how is he calling me? And he said, my wife and I
are going to the American Veterinary Medical
Association in July in Denver. And he said, I
notice you're on the program to speak. I said,
would you be willing to have breakfast?
So it was one of those things where it was a life goal
to get into administration. And it was the next
logical step for me. I had already been promoted to
associate professor in two years. So I thought,
why would they be asking an associate professor to
be a department head. So I was flattered and we
went, my wife and I both, we had breakfast with him.
He told me that he was leaving to go there in August
and that he would like for us to fly up and interview
in late August. And he would show me the campus. He
would tell me the plans and what they were going to
be doing. So we flew up there in September, or no,
late August of 1974.
And great interview. And everything just went, I
mean, you couldn't orchestrate it to go any
better. And I kept going through my mind, who are
all the other candidates that he is going to be
interviewing. Who are my peers across the nation,
much older than me, that he's going to also
interview? And he offered me the job on the spot.
And he said, I know this is a little unusual, but he
said, I've made up my mind that the people I want to
recruit, and they have given me the latitude of
starting this college by selecting my leadership
team. And he said, I want you to come and head up the
small animal medicine surgery department. Well,
I said, well, my wife and I need to go home and think
about it. You know, our families are in Texas. I
have so much loyalty to Texas A&M. But at the same
time, I knew that it was a career opportunity that I
had to seriously look at. So we got home, and we just
knew where we were going to go. And within two days,
I called him back, and I said, yes, we will come. And
so in October of 1974, we left and moved up there.
And I was the first person there after the dean was
there. So it was just the two of us for three or four
months to start the program from scratch. And we
had the opportunity to build the facilities, to
recruit the faculty. I mean, everything was brand
new. And I later asked him, because all the other
department heads and deans were older than I was.
And incidentally, one was an Aggie, Horace
Barron, who had taught in a large animal clinic
here. So later I asked him, I said, Bill, why did you
select me for that position? And he said, well, you
don't remember this, but he said, you came to
Michigan State and I think it was February of 1970,
and spoke to our state convention. And he said, I
was in the back of the room, and I heard you give your
presentation. He said, I have followed your
career ever since. And he said, I asked one or two
people, and he said, I was looking for someone
young that could give it the vigor and the vision.
And he said, that's how I got on it. to where I wanted
you to come and do this program. So that's how we got
there. And you were there how long? We were there
eight years. As you look back on being a part of
starting a new institution, really, what were the
most important decisions that y'all made? I don't
think there's any question what the most
important decisions that we made were decisions
related to the people that we recruited, not only
our leadership, but also our own faculty. And the
great advantage was that we had no deadwood, we had
no history, we had no baggage that was behind us, so
that we were able to select a leadership team and a
faculty from across the whole country. And when we
brought them in there, we told them what our
philosophy would be of teaching, what our
philosophy would be on student relations, what
our philosophy would be on service to the state
profession. And if that was not what they agreed
to, that was not the place for them. And it was an
exciting time. I got to recruit 25 faculty in my own
department. I was also in charge of building the
whole facilities, which was five and a half acres
under roof. And at my young age, that was, oh man,
that was so much fun. And to be given that
opportunity. And I recruited, in part because of
my young age, a very young faculty. My belief
system was that I wanted to look for young budding
stars, rose buds blossoming open, and bring them
in there and give them the opportunity to excel.
And it's amazing the number of those people who are
still there. In terms of size, enrollment and
faculty, when it got into full operation, how did
it compare, say, with A&M? We took 128 students at
A&M and we took 80 there. Okay. So it was about
three-fourths the size. But for that size state,
that was an adequate number. Is there anything
that you all did that in hindsight if you had to do
over again you'd change, you wouldn't do?
Anything you learned negatively? not really I
think probably if you were to ask all of us on the
leadership team we probably would have done most
everything the same way that we did it because we
had an advantage we had a Dean who that was his third
Dean ship so he pretty well knew the kinds of things
that needed to be done He was a tremendous
administrator and a tremendous statesman. Now,
where did I know of him? He was dean at A&M. Oh. He
preceded Al Price. Okay, okay, all right. And
having been dean at Texas A&M and then dean at
Michigan State, I think he served a total time on
faculty at A&M of 17 years, including part-time as
dean, and then 17 years at Michigan State. and then
became dean of the new program there. What were the
key
issues, problems, needs of a department head?
Well, I want to tell you that the key needs there
ultimately wound up to be financial needs. That is
not a wealthy state. we would oftentimes find
ourselves after the honeymoon was over about the
first three years they were on an annual
legislative session and it seemed like that we
were just always doing budgets and legislative
things so the biggest challenge I think that we had
quite frankly was the financial support of the
institution and that program and we rode out the
honeymoon for the period of time, but then you
begin to be looked at like all the other programs. I
think one of the other great challenges of a
department head is that you're somewhat in
between the higher administration and the
faculty. And in one sense, you represent your
faculty to the upper administration, and in
another sense, you represent the upper
administration back to the faculty. But for a
learning process and to me an essential
qualification for anyone that would go at a higher
level than academic administration they need to
have worked in a department head role because
that's where the academics the students all meet
the whole institutional administration before
you went up there did you turn to any department
head here for advice i talked to a number and i
particularly talked to the clinical department
heads about the challenges, the recruitment of
faculty, the different things that they thought
that I might be facing that I would need. They all
looked at it as a great opportunity for me because
they knew my interest in leadership. And I knew
that I was making a great transition in my own
career from having here at A&M had the opportunity
to travel worldwide almost and give
presentations in scientific papers. Now I was
going to be coming at a young age of only 32 over into
the arena of administration where a lot of the
accomplishments would no longer be on my academic
resume. I would have to be dependent upon the
accomplishments of the people that I led. So I
realized that early, and that was a part of, I
think, being able to lead those people in an
effective way. that I understood that from the
front end, and I wanted them to understand that,
that I was concerned and supportive of the mission
that we had to accomplish, but at the same time, I
wanted them to be able to excel in their own
achievements. And was your title department head
or chairman? Yeah, it was department head, and I
was promoted to full professor with tenure. Okay.
As department head, how much did you feel you
should automatically be bound by the majority
opinion of the department compared to your good
judgment? That's an interesting question
because in a faculty meeting, the first faculty
meeting with all the faculty after I had
recruited, I told them, I said, I want us to have as
much discussion and I will be as democratic as I can
but you'll have to know right now that I am held
accountable and I'm going to make the final
decision if I go against what you as a group believe
I'm going to tell you why and I'm going to give you my
judgment decision of why I'm making it that way But
it was rare that we disagreed for another reason.
We had recruited them to what we wanted to do. So I
didn't have somebody that I inherited that was
disgruntled or dissatisfied. Do you remember any
critical decision where there was some
disagreement? Yeah, I do. And I remember one
specific instance where we had a search committee
that selected an individual for a specialty area.
And this man was board certified, probably the
most qualified individual in America for that
particular specialty. And in my gut, I did not feel
that that was the person I wanted. And I let their
decision be accepted, I later had to terminate
that person. He was an explosion waiting to
happen. He was not tenured? No. So you didn't have
to go through the hearing or anything like that?
No, thank goodness. And life in Knoxville
compared to here? Life in Knoxville compared to
here was quite a contrast because Knoxville is a
city of 200,000 plus it had a double interstate
Running through the center of the city. It's in the
mountainous terrain So you only had limited
number of traffic arteries and being a country boy
and living in Bryan College Station I was not used
to to the kinds of traffic issues that we had to deal
with. That was different people-wise, very
similar. Another thing that was different
though, we had the four seasons of the year and
beautiful areas in the spring and particularly
the fall with the fall leaf color. And we
thoroughly enjoyed it. It is a wonderful place to
live. And now what was the image of the profession
of veterinary medicine and its importance in that
state compared to Texas? It was not as advanced in
that state, in part because probably It was a more
rural state than Texas. And I think that the income
levels were higher in Texas, particularly with
our major cities, so that veterinary medicine
probably was at a little higher sophisticated
level in Texas than it was there. But we elevated
that immediately because we knew that that would
be one of our missions And with the dean being a
consummate professional and having a
professional image, he was able to do that
starting at the state legislative level and all
the way down. And we did it through the university.
And we gained quick acceptance and great respect
in a hurry. All right. And then you come back to A&M
when? Well, that's interesting because I was
invited to come back to A&M after I'd only been
there two years. And to take the large medicine, I
mean, the department, which was very large, of
medicine and surgery and break it into two
departments. One would be large animal medicine
surgery, the other would be small animal medicine
and surgery. And I would be given the opportunity
to build a complete new small animal hospital. And
I can tell you that my heart was to come home. Our
families lived here. I mean, I loved A&M with all of
my heart. I wanted to come back here. This is a
well-funded program. They had finances. They had
resources. But I couldn't do it and be a person of
integrity and character because I had been given a
trust and a responsibility to help build
something there. And I felt that I owed them at
least five or six years. But I had a confidence in my
heart that at the right time that something would
open up for me to come to A&M. And after we'd been
there seven years, it was announced that the
associate dean for academic programs, who at the
time was Wallace Bay, was going to retire a year in
advance and they were going to start searching.
Well, I just began to feel that there was a
confidence that that was going to open up for me.
And I knew they'd have to go through this big search
process, which they did. I came. I went through the
interview. I interviewed with everybody you can
dream of and made a presentation to the faculty.
And one part of the presentation was crucial
because A&M was the College of Veterinary
Medicine and then moving from the three-year
curriculum back to a four. Well, I had just been a
part of developing a brand new four-year
curriculum. Plus, I had been a graduate of the
three-year and had taught on the three-year. So I
geared my presentation to what I thought would be a
creative concept of moving to that and what I felt
were the academic and student responsibilities
of the position. And I was offered the position
within a few weeks after I interviewed. And I had
already, in eight years, I had done what I believed
I could do there Plus, I'm one of those people that
every five to six years, I need a new challenge. And
this would have been a great challenge. It was
another advancement for me. And quite clearly, it
was coming home. All right, now you had met this
dean that was here before you left. Wasn't he here?
Yes, but only for I think a few months before I left
the University of Tennessee. So I really did not
know him except through the eight years at the
University of Tennessee. I'd always been at the
national meetings and I had met him. I'd gone to the
A&M alumni reception and had gotten to know what a
fine gentleman that he was. And as far as you know,
was he a factor in making the final decision? I'm
certain it was his decision. The search
committee, I know, made their recommendation and
then it was, I'm sure, his decision. His
consultation, probably with you, I don't know
whether you were still here at the time, but I will
tell you one thing. When I left here to go to the
University of Tennessee, a part of this process,
you may not remember this, But you had an exit
interview with people who left here. And I
remember you were officed over in the Teague
building. And you asked me to come over and talk to
you, which I did. And I never forgot that. That
meant a lot to me about the administration's
concern and just interest in where their faculty
members were going. To me, any time a faculty
member left here and went to another university in
an advancement, that was really a compliment to
A&M. And I later had to remind deans and department
heads of that. Among things that I believed in then
and still do, see, I would try to have for every
prospective faculty member from off campus, I
would say to the search department or whatever it
might be, give me a half hour. Under no
circumstance will I try to investigate and judge
the person. I want to try to tell them as candidly
and as honestly as I can what this institution is
and what it hopes to become. They may not like what
we are. They may not. Then the other one was to try to
find out, as tactfully as I could, is there
anything that is a factor in this person's leaving
that we maybe need to know about that I might learn.
In those initial interviews, I discovered one guy
I mentioned he had his Ph.D. from Virginia. I
mentioned going over to work, and I gave the name of
the library. And I realized, you know, I'm Hunt,
and I mentioned it. Oh, oh, oh, yes, yes. I thought,
hmm. I then made up three people's names in his
supposed area, and he knew them all well. I then
called the department and I said, you need to
check. Something didn't work. They called that
department at Virginia. They had never heard of
him. His resume was a fraud. Make believe I didn't
know George Shelton well. Describe George
Shelton. George Shelton was probably the most
gracious human being I have ever worked with in my
life. And George was a person who, when he gave you a
responsibility, it was yours. I never will forget
once I told George, I said, George, you're almost
too nice to be a dean.
To never ruffle the feathers of anyone.